docs: Add decision proposal for identity hub and issuer service repos (#8)
eclipse-tractusx/sig-architecture: docs/decision-records/0001_identity-hub_and_issuer-service.md

## Possible approaches

Regarding the credential service, the viable option is creating a Tractus-X distribution of the [Eclipse EDC IdentityHub](https://github.com/eclipse-edc/IdentityHub), which is an open-source Eclipse project of a credential service implementing the DCP protocol.
For the issuer service, there are two options:

- continue development on the current [ssi-credential-issuer](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-credential-issuer)
- replace the current [ssi-credential-issuer](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-credential-issuer) by a Tractus-X distribution of the [Eclipse EDC Issuer Service](https://github.com/eclipse-edc/IdentityHub) (currently still in the same repository as the Eclipse EDC Identity Hub)

### Option 1: Continue development on the current [ssi-credential-issuer](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-credential-issuer)

#### Pros

- build on existing code base
- already integrated with portal backend

#### Cons

- delegation of features (signing and revoking VCs, DID and key management) to a proprietary credential service instance

> - not open for extension to additional credential types or schemas without a code-level change and a redeployment (causing a service disruption)

Reviewer: Yes, it's not proper to say that's it's `not open for extension`, to have those credential specifics endpoint was a requirement in the past, and now this requirement simply has changed. One could simply extend the current component to support adding credentials via config.

> - not open for extension to additional credential types or schemas without a code-level change and a redeployment (causing a service disruption)

Author: I understand that these were requirements at the time which had to be fulfilled but then changed. I rephrased it now to focus clearly on adding new credential types without requiring code-level changes.

- reliance on a central IdP (Keycloak) for issuing credentials
- not compliant with DCP issuance
- security concerns (client VCs are stored)

### Option 2: Introduce a Tractus-X distribution of the [Eclipse EDC Issuer Service](https://github.com/eclipse-edc/IdentityHub)

#### Pros

- supports all features listed in the [functional requirements](#functional) above without delegating their execution to external services

> - introducing a Tractus-X distribution of an 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- introducing a Tractus-X distribution of an <I do not know, but something, right? ;-)>
```

### Rationale

- continuing development on the [ssi-credential-issuer](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-credential-issuer) until all requirements listed above are met involves an amount of work essentially equivalent to a rewrite from scratch 
- introducing Tractus-X distributions of upstream dataspace-agnostic projects is essential for interoperability with other dataspaces
- using components from upstream projects as standard dependencies in Tractus-X distributions reduces development, testing, and maintenance effort within Tractus-X

### Actions

Add two new repositories (related PRs [tractusx-identityhub](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/.eclipsefdn/pull/117) and [tractusx-issuerservice](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/.eclipsefdn/pull/118)) for Tractus-X distributions of the [Eclipse EDC IdentityHub and IssuerService](https://github.com/eclipse-edc/IdentityHub):

- `tractusx-identityhub`
- `tractusx-issuerservice`

Use the relevant components from upstream developments as standard dependencies in the Tractus-X distributions.

Responsible committers for the new repositories as of now are Boris Rizov (@borisrizov-zf) and Rafael Magalhães (@rafaelmag110).

> ### Implications

Reviewer 3: Can you call it consequences, is a "standard" wording for decision records.
```suggestion
### Consequences
```

Reviewer 3: then people can use your template to create other decisions in the future.

Author: > then people can use your template to create other decisions in the future.

That was my intention!

<!--
#######################################################################

Tractus-X - Special Interest Group (SIG) Architecture

Copyright (c) 2025 Contributors to the Eclipse Foundation

See the NOTICE file(s) distributed with this work for additional
information regarding copyright ownership.

This work is made available under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC-BY-4.0) license,
which is available at
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0

#######################################################################
-->

# Decision Proposal: Adding Tractus-X IdentityHub and Tractux-X IssuerService

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Context

As the [`managed-identity-wallet`](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/managed-identity-wallet) component (a.k.a MIW) was our reference implementation from the wallet, and it is now deprecated, we need to take a decision on a way forward on providing an open source reference implementation for the "wallet" and "decentralized claims protocol" (a.k.a DCP) enforcement. This decision is influenced by the fact that the decentralization of the wallet implementation is a path which is was decided from the first Catena-X consortium architecture roadmap for a more scalable, secure and interoperable data exchange. 

Since the MIW was deprecated and also never used in production because of security reasons, because the only way to test the data exchange available right now is the [`ssi-dim-wallet-stub`](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-dim-wallet-stub) which implements only a minimal viable wallet with no DCP logic- 

The [`ssi-issuer-service`] is a service which provided already some interfaces and logics to issue credentials for Catena-X members based on a primitive implementation of the `Decentralized Claims Protocol`, which provider the Verifiable Credential signature service. 

Therefore for increasing the flexibility and the future extension of protocols, the upstream [`issuer-service`]()  and the upstream [`identity-hub`](https://github.com/eclipse-edc/IdentityHub) are going to be used to make it more scalable
```

## Proposed decision

Add two new repositories for Tractus-X distributions of the [Eclipse EDC IdentityHub and IssuerService](https://github.com/eclipse-edc/IdentityHub):

- `tractusx-identityhub`
- `tractusx-issuerservice`

From release 25.09 onwards, the current [ssi-credential-issuer](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-credential-issuer) will no longer be needed in the Catena-X architecture and will therefore no longer need to be maintained.

> Responsible committers for the new repositories as of now are Boris Rizov (@borisrizov-zf) and Rafael Magalhães (@rafaelmag110).

Reviewer 2: I would expect, that this is not the right github account for Boris, as he is no longer financed by ZF, right?

Author: Checked with @borisrizov-zf, it's still the account he currently uses.

## Rationale

> Going forward, the Tractus-X IdentityHub distribution (based on [EDC IdentityHub](https://github.com/eclipse-edc/IdentityHub)) will serve as the open-source basis for credential services ("wallets") in Tractus-X.

Reviewer 2: That is actually no rationale but a statement. What are we deciding in here? Imho, it is whether we need the two repositories and that from a certain point in time other repositories get out of maintenance. Because the decision whether the future solution is build on the upstream components is a decision to be done by the investors in conjunction with Catena-X, as these are also responsible to describe how the components developed here will be maintained on the long run.

That would actually be a statement I miss here, we are building software, we should have a substantial information on what will happen after 25/09 when the development invest ends and a maintenance invest is needed. Thanks @evegufy for pointing that out in the discussion on Monday. As committer group we have to ensure, that we do not get a bunch of code thrown over the fence and then left to live with it.

In the same manner, the Tractus-X Issuer Service will replace the current [ssi-credential-issuer](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-credential-issuer) component.
Therefore, Tractus-X distributions of these upstream components are needed, which will be developed and maintained in the aforementioned Tractus-X repositories.

The current [SSI Credential Issuer](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-credential-issuer) has several drawbacks:

> - a hard dependency on a proprietary wallet instance for basic features such as creating, signing and revoking verifiable credentials, DID document management and key management.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- delegation of basic features to a proprietary wallet instance such as creating, signing and revoking verifiable credentials, DID document management and key management.
```

- adding additional credential types or schemas requires a code-level change and a redeployment (service disruption)
- reliance on central IdP (Keycloak) for issuing credentials
- security concerns (client credentials are stored)

> - not compliant with DCP (Issuance)

Reviewer 2: Isn't this argument number 2.
The non-availability of basic features is the most important argument, because we want an Open-Source solution
The non-compliance with DCP is as well an important argument, that it does not make sense to follow-up on the current implementation
The remaining arguments are not important enough to argue to not follow the current implementation, as this could be fixed in the development activities or not?

## Approach

Provision two new repositories (related PRs [tractusx-identityhub](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/.eclipsefdn/pull/117) and [tractusx-issuerservice](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/.eclipsefdn/pull/118)), and create Tractus-X distributions of the aforementioned upstream components.

> Upstream developments will automatically filter down into the Tracts-X distributions, thus limiting the development, testing and maintenance surface significantly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The relevant components from upstream developments will be used as standard dependencies in the Tractus-X distributions, which reduces necessary efforts concerning development, testing and maintenance significantly.
```

## Possible alternatives

> Theoretically, it would be possible to continue development of the `ssi-credential-issuer` component until all of the aforementioned drawbacks are addressed.

Reviewer 2: I do not get the two punch approach here, above, it is mentioned why the current implementation has severe drawbacks that make a new start important, and now this is retaliation because the alternative was discarded anyway above. Besides that, perhaps the rationale above is quite week to be honest. And it gets even weaker if the drawback section is combined with this solution here. Or the possible alternatives are moved to the rationale section to make the argumentation stronger.

<!--
#######################################################################

Tractus-X - Special Interest Group (SIG) Architecture

Copyright (c) 2025 Contributors to the Eclipse Foundation

See the NOTICE file(s) distributed with this work for additional
information regarding copyright ownership.

This work is made available under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC-BY-4.0) license,
which is available at
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0

#######################################################################
-->

# Decision Record: Adding Tractus-X IdentityHub and Tractux-X IssuerService

## Problem statement

The current Tractus-X architecture is dependent on a proprietary credential service ("wallet") for both managing and issuing verifiable credentials.

> This renders it impossible to run a Catena-X dataspace using only open-source software.

Reviewer 3: Please also mention we had an open source wallet. it's fair to say now that we migrate to a more "decentralized" approach which is also not propertary.  

```suggestion
This renders it impossible to run a Catena-X dataspace using only open-source software. Since the only open source wallet solution the [Managed Identity Wallet (MIW)](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/managed-identity-wallet) was never used in production and it got deprecated. 

Additionally to have a decentralized wallet is a decision which was took from the architecture perspective and will contribute to our road to total decentralization of the Catena-X Dataspace.
```

Reviewer: @matbmoser this isn't true, the MIW was in production until the golive of the Jupiter release

Reviewer 3: > @matbmoser this isn't true, the MIW was in production until the golive of the Jupiter release

then lets state it then, but tell that it was deprecated, I fit the changes.

Reviewer 3: @marcelruland now it is fixed

Reviewer: @matbmoser MIW was in production until the golive of Jupiter, with Jupiter SAP DIM/DIV was used

Reviewer 2: To be honest, why should we mention the MIW here. This decision record is not a stating any history, but it should point out the current deficiency that should be solved by doing the decision. Coming back to my earlier comment, what is the decision record about? It is an Catena-X architecture decision to be taken and then it is about the development resources that need to be provided by and for Tractus-X to do the implementation in a sustainable way.

  - a generic credential generation framework
- devise, implement and test a complete extensibility framework
- implement, test, and maintain an admin API to be consumed by portal

Given the development and maintenance efforts that would be necessary, refactoring the `ssi-credential-issuer` is not a viable alternative.

## Proposed decision

Add two new repositories (related PRs [tractusx-identityhub](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/.eclipsefdn/pull/117) and [tractusx-issuerservice](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/.eclipsefdn/pull/118)) for Tractus-X distributions of the [Eclipse EDC IdentityHub and IssuerService](https://github.com/eclipse-edc/IdentityHub):

- `tractusx-identityhub`
- `tractusx-issuerservice`

The relevant components from upstream developments will be used as standard dependencies in the Tractus-X distributions, which reduces necessary efforts concerning development, testing and maintenance significantly.
From release 25.09 onwards, the current [ssi-credential-issuer](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-credential-issuer) will no longer be needed in the Catena-X architecture and will therefore no longer need to be maintained.

> Responsible committers for the new repositories as of now are Boris Rizov (@borisrizov-zf) and Rafael Magalhães (@rafaelmag110).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

Agree with @evegufy here please remove the committers from the decision record

Reviewer: @matbmoser I actually stated the opposite, that they need to be added, we need to clarify responsibilities (especially in the case of core and enablement services.

Reviewer 3: Oh I understood it wrong then, this PR is too confusing, I am losing the track.

Author: > Oh I understood it wrong then, this PR is too confusing, I am losing the track.

I feel you. I'm restructuring the whole thing right now so it'll be much clearer.

## Rationale

Going forward, the Tractus-X IdentityHub distribution (based on [EDC IdentityHub](https://github.com/eclipse-edc/IdentityHub)) will serve as the open-source basis for credential services ("wallets") in Tractus-X.
In the same manner, the Tractus-X Issuer Service will replace the current [ssi-credential-issuer](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-credential-issuer) component.
Therefore, Tractus-X distributions of these upstream components are needed, which will be developed and maintained in the aforementioned Tractus-X repositories.

The current [SSI Credential Issuer](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-credential-issuer) has several drawbacks:

- delegation of basic features to a proprietary wallet instance such as creating, signing and revoking verifiable credentials, DID document management and key management.
- adding additional credential types or schemas requires a code-level change and a redeployment (service disruption)
- reliance on central IdP (Keycloak) for issuing credentials
- security concerns (client credentials are stored)

> - not compliant with DCP (Issuance)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- not compliant with DCP (Issuance)

## Consequences

- The [portal-backend](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/portal-backend)  & [portal-frontend](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/portal-frontend) components needs to be refactored to adapt the new issuer service
    - Mitigation:  Cofinity-X will integrate the necessary changes in the portal to make the issue flow possible
    
- Multi-Wallet support is required from the portal perspective.

- A structure for "onboarding" your own wallet is required.     
```

<!--
#######################################################################

Tractus-X - Special Interest Group (SIG) Architecture

Copyright (c) 2025 Contributors to the Eclipse Foundation

See the NOTICE file(s) distributed with this work for additional
information regarding copyright ownership.

This work is made available under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC-BY-4.0) license,
which is available at
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0

#######################################################################
-->

# Decision Proposal: Adding Tractus-X IdentityHub and Tractux-X IssuerService

> ## Context

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

## Context
```

Since the MIW was deprecated and also never used in production because of security reasons, because the only way to test the data exchange available right now is the [`ssi-dim-wallet-stub`](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/ssi-dim-wallet-stub) which implements only a minimal viable wallet with no DCP logic- 

The [`ssi-issuer-service`] is a service which provided already some interfaces and logics to issue credentials for Catena-X members based on a primitive implementation of the `Decentralized Claims Protocol`, which provider the Verifiable Credential signature service. 

Therefore for increasing the flexibility and the future extension of protocols, the upstream [`issuer-service`]()  and the upstream [`identity-hub`](https://github.com/eclipse-edc/IdentityHub) are going to be used to make it more scalable

> ## Proposed decision

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

## Proposed decision
```

Reviewer 2: Actually, isn't it a decision. That is why we do this effort, not to propose a decision but to do it, right?
